[MUSIC]
>> Douglas Crockford: Well, that is it.
So I think we are at the end of the day,
so how is everybody feeling?
We should do bunch of questions
before we all go home.
>> Douglas Crockford: Anybody?
>> Douglas Crockford: Or
we can do more problems?
>> Speaker 2: What text editor do you
use in case someone wants to build your
context code?
>> Douglas Crockford: Yeah,
what text editor do I use?
I use geany, G-E-A-N-Y,
which is a really a basic, simple editor.
Does code folding, but
it doesn't do it right.
And it does coloring, but
it doesn't do that right.
But it's a simple editor,
that's all I need.
I don't necessarily need that one fixed,
I just need one that works right.
So, yeah.
>> Speaker 3: You said the triple
documentation was, I think,
the second most?
>> Douglas Crockford: My
second most favorite, yeah.
>> Speaker 3: Yeah, what's your first?
>> Douglas Crockford: Proper tail calls.
What the hell is that?
So one of the things that they
discovered in scheme was that,
actually this was known for a long time.
But scheme took the idea and said this has
to be standard equipment in the language,
this is not an option.
So if you have a subroutine call,
like a JSR in some machines,
followed immediately by a return,
you can replace that with a jump and
that has a couple of results.
One is that the program goes faster,
because you're not
putting something on the stack and
taking something off the stack and
having a couple of jumps
which CPUs don't like to do.
You just go in there, and so
that's a simple optimization.
They found that the same thing
applies to functional programming.
So if the last thing a function
does is return the result
of calling another function,
they can replace that with a jump.
So that has the obvious
performance benefit, but
it turns out it enables
new styles of programming.
For one thing, we can't do deep
recursion in JavaScript today,
because the browsers all have
fairly shallow stack limits.
But with this tail recursion thing,
because those calls turn into jumps,
there's no stack cost, right?
So we can go as deep as we want
without blowing the stack.
So you can literally change loops into
functions with no performance penalty.
That's pretty neat.
But even neater is there's another style
of programming called continuation
passing style.
Which I would have shown you at
the very end of the problems today, but
I doubt that anyone would have
been awake at that point.
And in continuation passing
style functions never return,
instead you pass to each function
the parameters that it needs plus
one more which is the function
that it should send the result to.
Okay, it's sort of like a call back
except it's calling forward and
it will probably do a similar thing.
And so you have this big stream of
computation that is always going forward,
nothing ever returns.
Okay, it's all going like that,
and it's wonderful and amazing.
And we can't do it in JavaScript today,
because eventually,
you run out of stack, right?
Since nothing ever returns, you consume
all the memory, and everything dies.
But in continuation passing style,
the way you write these things is,
return function thing
going forward forever.
And the compiler knows okay, we're
doing that and the code just gets those
streamlined and the garbage collector
knows how to get rid of all its stuff and
all stays clean and fast and wonderful.
And we can do things which are even more
amazing than what we did this afternoon.
So I'm looking forward to that.
One of the benefits of that is that
JavaScript has now become
a compilation target, right?
We used to think that the JavaVM was gonna
be the virtual machine of the Internet,
turns out it's JavaScript.
So people are now writing compilers
which generate JavaScript code instead
of writing bicode or anything else.
Google is translating Java into
JavaScript, so it can run everywhere.
And there are whole new
languages being invented,
specifically to be executed by JavaScript.
So if you're a language designer,
you don't have to create
a virtual machine anymore.
You don't have to write a compiler,
you just have to write parser
that generates JavaScript.
And a lot of people are doing that, so
there is pressure on JavaScript to
become a better compilation target.
If you're trying to create control
structures that don't map exactly onto
the silly set that JavaScript has,
your code gets really bad, right?
And so you would like as a language
designer to have a goto in the language,
because you want to be able
to synthesize your own stuff,
treating JavaScript like
a low level machine language.
But we know that that would be a disaster
if we had goto directly to the language.
Duxtler wrote back in the 60s, was it?
Yeah, I think it was in the 60s
that goto is considered harmful.
It took us 20 years to get rid of goto,
and in that time we had
endless stupid debates about should
we get rid of the goto or not?
And particularly, most of the talking
come from the old guys saying,
you can't take it away from us without
goto, we can't write efficient programs.
Why are you doing this to us?
We need our tools.
So I think the reason it took
20 years was we had to wait for
all those guys retire or die.
>> Speaker 4: [LAUGH]
>> Douglas Crockford: And
once they were gone it was like,
okay, can we get rid of it now?
And say yeah, okay, good, and we got
rid of it, and we don't miss it, right?
But I know for a fact if we put
goto back into JavaScript, and
we can because it's still a reserved word.
So we could put it in the language,
some idiot web developers gonna blog,
wow, did you know can make your
programs go super fast if you use goto?
And then certainly we're gonna
have to wait for them to die,
before we get rid of it again.
>> Speaker 4: [LAUGH]
>> Douglas Crockford: So
we can't put anything into
the language for one class of people,
without exposing it to everybody.
And we know that would cause harm,
so we're not gonna do that.
But proper tail calls allows
us to have goto with this
syntactic form which is not dangerous,
which is actually extremely beneficial.
So compiler writers would
probably be the first to benefit
from the continuation passing style,
cuz that turns out to be a brilliant
way to implement programming languages.
So that's gonna be my favorite-most
feature, anybody else?
>> Speaker 5: I have one question.
>> Douglas Crockford: Yeah.
>> Speaker 5: You mentioned that if
the class system used by Java, C#, etc.
And then would JavaScript, do you have
the prototyping that you preferred and
thought that the prototyping
was more powerful?
>> Douglas Crockford: Mm-hm.
>> Speaker 5: Could you reflect
a little bit on what
I'm talking about that?
>> Douglas Crockford: Yeah, so I believe
that, so a little bit of history.
So Randy Smith was a researcher,
I guess he was at Xerox park at that time.
I met him Atari lab earlier.
And he was working on
a system called Morphix.
Morphix were objects which had
stated behavior like other objects,
but also a visual presentation.
And he had this wonderful little demo
set up where he could take objects which
were on the screen.
And open them up and reprogram them
dynamically as the thing was running, and
all this amazing behavior would occur.
It was really great, and
he showed this to David Unger,
who earlier have been working on trying
to make Smalltalk go really fast.
He was designed a risk processor
specifically to run Smalltalk.
And he was amazed at the stuff Randy
was doing, so we got to do that, so
how can we make this better?
And so they started collaborating and
the thing that they came up
with was the self language.
So it turned out the morphics were much
easier to compose if there were no
classes, if you could just assign
functions directly to the things
everything was so much easier and faster.
And then Unger spent a lot
of time looking at, okay,
how do we take the implementations of
that, and make them go really fast?
So a lot of what we know now
about how we make things go fast,
came from the self project, for
example how to make virtual machines
like the Java virtual machine go fast.
That came out of self,
generation of scavenging
in order to make garbage collection go
really fast, that came out of self.
And but the prototype idea nobody
paid much attention to it except for
Branden, he thought all that's cool.
I'll throw them in large script and
see what happens, and it's brilliant.
So a lot of people work on it as being a
step backward, that JavaScript isn't even
object oriented, it's object based or some
or worse or some silly thing like that.
It's actually the next evolutionary
step in object oriented programming.
It's sort of taking the thing
that simular proposed and
saying no, they weren't right about
that one and sort of going from that,
taking the core of the good ideas in
a more expressive way and going forward.
And that JavaScript has, it's brilliant.
And it is so powerful that you
might never find out about it.
Because it's so powerful,
you can use the other paradigms.
You can do the classical style and
it works pretty well.
But if you stick with that,
you'll never make the breakthrough
into what it can really do.
So my prediction is that future
languages will actually look
a lot like JavaScript,
and a lot less like Java.
Although it's a daring
prediction to make right now,
because there is tremendous pressure still
on making JavaScript look more like Java.
So in the short term that might
not turn out to be true, but
I think the long term it does.
Yeah.
>> Speaker 6: Along that same thing,
what are your thoughts on TypeScripts?
>> Douglas Crockford: What
do I think about TypeScript?
So TypeScript is a tool that
was developed in Microsoft in
order to make Visual Studio work
more effectively with JavaScript.
One of the difficulties with
JavaScript is, because it's so
dynamic things like code
completion don't work well for it.
Because you say variable dot,
you don't have a short list of methods
that come off of that,
because it could be anything.
So about the best you can do is take
the list of all known methods and say,
do you want one of those?
And so they were looking
at doing something better.
So they have another language which
is now being called TypeScript,
which compiles into JavaScript.
Which adds typing to JavaScript, so
you can annotate your variables and say,
this one is a number and
this one is a string.
And this one is a function that takes a
method that has this signature, and so on.
And it takes all of that and
then runs it through a compiler,
and generates very nice JavaScript code.
There are a lot of language processors
that transpile into JavaScript,
it's probably the nicest.
Most of them generate code,
which is just horrible and awful.
And TypeScript went to a lot of trouble to
make code which is actually pretty good.
So for my money, it is the best of all
of the JavaScript frontends out there.
But I'm not gonna use it for
a couple reasons.
One is,
it doesn't solve the problem I have.
I don't need autocomplete,
I can type my own programs fine, and
so I don't need that capability.
I'm not willing to pay
the cost in order to get it.
And people who are used to Java and other
strongly typed languages are confused
by that, cuz they say there is no cost.
But there is, and so when I started with
JavaScript I was alarmed at how
flimsy the language seem to be.
And where are my types?
How am I gonna know that
everything is working?
And my experience with the language
was that, also the theory with
strong typing is the type system
can find all sorts of errors early.
And the earlier you can find an error,
the less its gonna cost.
And that's good,
we want to have early detection of
errors and that's absolutely true.
But what I found working
with JavaScript was,
having a type system doesn't
relieve you of the need to test.
Cuz the class of potential errors is much,
much,
much bigger than the class of errors
that are detected by type checking.
All right, so you still have to write all
the tests, and you still have to test.
And I found the amount of testing I
was doing in JavaScript was comparable
to what I had done in Java, so
I wasn't seeing much of a benefit.
On the other side, I found that not having
to deal with types was a huge relief,
cuz it meant I was doing a lot
less work in the programming,
I was doing about the same amount of work
in testing, that looked like a wind to me.
And ultimately,
my analysis was that the type checking
just wasn't paying for itself.
That the freedom of being able
to express stuff the way I want.
And also any type system in
which you ever have to cast, and
my opinion that was not a type system,
it's just an annoyance.
Anytime you have to break the system
in order to accomplish something
useful means the type
system is not working.
So I reluctantly eventually
got used to the idea that
JavaScript actually got it right.
This is something that the Lisp
guys have known all along,
at least they had never
had strong typing in it.
And it always worked great, and they do
some of the most complex programs ever
written and have not been burdened by
the absence of a type system at all.
So everybody has a different
opinion on this, and
most of the opinions are not based
on any kind of data or experience.
Most opinions are based on having
programmed on one side but
not on the other.
I've been on both sides,
and I have to tell you,
I was surprised to find that I
think JavaScript got it right.
And so for that reason,
TypeScript doesn't offer much for me,
it provides a few conveniences.
And again, of the things of that class,
it is by far, the best.
But if I use TypeScript I can't use
JSLint anymore, cuz JSLint doesn't
understand that language and JSLint
buys me a lot more than TypeScript does.
So I'm sticking with it.
>> Douglas Crockford: Okay, one more?
Any one more?
Anybody?
Someone doesn't ask a question
you're all gonna have to go home.
>> Speaker 7: Did you have-
>> Douglas Crockford: Yeah.
>> Speaker 7: More information on Ajax and
DOM manipulation that
you're gonna talk about?
>> Douglas Crockford: I
was gonna do one more, but
I think we're all pretty
burnt at this point.
So you guys will get the slide and
that talk is online somewhere, so
we'll probably be able to
give you a link to it.
>> Douglas Crockford: Okay,
go home everybody.
>> Speaker 8: [APPLAUSE]